src/packages/server/conat/socketio/README.md, before:

# Conat Socket.IO Auth Overview

This folder defines Conat websocket authentication and per-subject authorization rules.

In CoCalc, Conat security is primarily enforced by restricting which subjects a connected identity may publish to and subscribe to. Authentication establishes identity (`account`, `project`, `host`, or `hub`), then authorization is evaluated on each subject operation.

The same policy model is used in two places:

- Central hub adapter: [src/packages/server/conat/socketio/auth.ts](./auth.ts)
- Project-host adapter: [src/packages/project-host/conat-auth.ts](../../project-host/conat-auth.ts)

To avoid policy drift, shared rule helpers live in [src/packages/conat/auth/subject-policy.ts](../../../conat/auth/subject-policy.ts).

## What Rules Are Enforced

At a high level:

- Allow publish to own hub request subject: `hub.<type>.<id>.*`
- Allow publish to `_INBOX.*` (request/reply responses)
- Allow subscribe to own inbox prefix only
- Allow subscribe to `public.*`
- Allow account/project/host self-subjects (e.g. `account.<id>.*`, `project.<id>.*`, `host.<id>.*`)
- For accounts, allow project subjects only when collaborator/owner checks pass
- Deny by default for unknown subjects

Central hub and project-host differ in where collaborator checks come from:

- Central hub: postgres-backed checks
- Project-host: local mirrored project metadata / ACL cache

## Main Components

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  Browser[Web Browser / Account]
  Hub[Central Hub]
  PH[Project-Host]
  Proj[Project Containers]
  Conat[Conat Subject Auth Rules]

  Browser -->|Cookie auth| Hub
  Browser -->|Host-scoped bearer token| PH
  Hub -->|Issue short-lived token| Browser
  PH -->|Proxy / route| Proj

  Hub --> Conat
  PH --> Conat
  Conat -->|allow/deny pub/sub by subject| Hub
  Conat -->|allow/deny pub/sub by subject| PH
```

## Caveats When Changing Rules

- Keep shared policy in `conat/auth/subject-policy.ts` authoritative where possible.
- If adding a new subject namespace, update both adapters and tests together.
- **Subject auth is capability auth.** Accidentally broad patterns can grant large access quickly.
- Frontend routing can send hub RPC traffic directly to project-host for selected methods; auth rules must still be strict on project-host.
- Avoid coupling policy to transient transport details (addresses, websocket ids). Prefer stable identity + subject checks.

## Related Documentation

- [docs/project-host-auth.md](../../../../docs/project-host-auth.md)
- [docs/codex-auth.md](../../../../docs/codex-auth.md)

Commit message:

Switch project-host auth tokens to Ed25519 signed JWTs

src/packages/server/conat/socketio/README.md, after:

# Conat Socket.IO Auth Overview

This folder defines Conat websocket authentication and per-subject authorization rules.

In CoCalc, Conat security is primarily enforced by restricting which subjects a connected identity may publish to and subscribe to. Authentication establishes identity (`account`, `project`, `host`, or `hub`), then authorization is evaluated on each subject operation.

The same policy model is used in two places:

- Central hub adapter: [src/packages/server/conat/socketio/auth.ts](./auth.ts)
- Project-host adapter: [src/packages/project-host/conat-auth.ts](../../project-host/conat-auth.ts)

To avoid policy drift, shared rule helpers live in [src/packages/conat/auth/subject-policy.ts](../../../conat/auth/subject-policy.ts).

Project-host browser auth tokens are signed centrally using Ed25519 private key
and verified on project-hosts using only the public key.

## What Rules Are Enforced

At a high level:

- Allow publish to own hub request subject: `hub.<type>.<id>.*`
- Allow publish to `_INBOX.*` (request/reply responses)
- Allow subscribe to own inbox prefix only
- Allow subscribe to `public.*`
- Allow account/project/host self-subjects (e.g. `account.<id>.*`, `project.<id>.*`, `host.<id>.*`)
- For accounts, allow project subjects only when collaborator/owner checks pass
- Deny by default for unknown subjects

Central hub and project-host differ in where collaborator checks come from:

- Central hub: postgres-backed checks
- Project-host: local mirrored project metadata / ACL cache

## Main Components

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  Browser[Web Browser / Account]
  Hub[Central Hub]
  PH[Project-Host]
  Proj[Project Containers]
  Conat[Conat Subject Auth Rules]

  Browser -->|Cookie auth| Hub
  Browser -->|Host-scoped bearer token| PH
  Hub -->|Issue short-lived token| Browser
  PH -->|Proxy / route| Proj

  Hub --> Conat
  PH --> Conat
  Conat -->|allow/deny pub/sub by subject| Hub
  Conat -->|allow/deny pub/sub by subject| PH
```

## Caveats When Changing Rules

- Keep shared policy in `conat/auth/subject-policy.ts` authoritative where possible.
- If adding a new subject namespace, update both adapters and tests together.
- **Subject auth is capability auth.** Accidentally broad patterns can grant large access quickly.
- Frontend routing can send hub RPC traffic directly to project-host for selected methods; auth rules must still be strict on project-host.
- Avoid coupling policy to transient transport details (addresses, websocket ids). Prefer stable identity + subject checks.

## Related Documentation

- [docs/project-host-auth.md](../../../../docs/project-host-auth.md)
- [docs/codex-auth.md](../../../../docs/codex-auth.md)
