src/scripts/dev/README.md, before:

# Local Hub Daemon + Self-Host Smoke

## One-time setup (optional)

```bash
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:init
```

This creates a local, untracked config at:

- `src/.local/hub-daemon.env`

Edit that file as needed.

Notes:

- `pnpm --dir src smoke:self-host` will auto-create this config on first run if missing and continue with defaults.
- Set `SMOKE_REQUIRE_EXISTING_CONFIG=1` to keep the old fail-fast behavior that requires manual config editing first.

## Hub daemon control

```bash
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:start
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:status
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:logs
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:stop
```

## Self-host smoke test (multipass)

```bash
pnpm --dir src smoke:self-host
```

By default this script:

1. Builds local `project-host` + `project` bundles (and tools if missing).
2. Builds `@cocalc/server`.
3. Starts hub daemon (if not running).
4. Runs self-host multipass smoke tests end-to-end, including:
   - cross-project file copy (project A -> project B),
   - backup indexing,
   - optional move/restore to a second host.

You can override behavior via variables in `src/.local/hub-daemon.env`.
For smoke-only toggles, set environment variables when invoking, e.g.:

```bash
SMOKE_VERIFY_COPY_BETWEEN_PROJECTS=0 pnpm --dir src smoke:self-host
```

Commit message:

Fix self-host smoke reliability and local software resolution

src/scripts/dev/README.md, after:

# Local Hub Daemon + Self-Host Smoke

## One-time setup (optional)

```bash
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:init
```

This creates a local, untracked config at:

- `src/.local/hub-daemon.env`

Edit that file as needed.

Notes:

- `pnpm --dir src smoke:self-host` will auto-create this config on first run if missing and continue with defaults.
- Set `SMOKE_REQUIRE_EXISTING_CONFIG=1` to keep the old fail-fast behavior that requires manual config editing first.
- Smoke defaults to cleanup on failure (`SMOKE_CLEANUP_FAILURE=1`) so failed runs do not leave Multipass VMs consuming RAM.
- Smoke auto-selects a free local pairing sshd port when `COCALC_SSHD_PORT` is unset; disable this with `SMOKE_AUTO_SSHD_PORT=0`.
- Smoke rebuilds hub by default (`SMOKE_BUILD_HUB=1`) so software-manifest changes are picked up before each run.
- Smoke now ensures full `tools-linux-*` artifacts are built (not `tools-minimal`) because project-start in smoke requires `dropbear`.

## Hub daemon control

```bash
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:start
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:status
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:logs
pnpm --dir src hub:daemon:stop
```

## Self-host smoke test (multipass)

```bash
pnpm --dir src smoke:self-host
```

By default this script:

1. Builds local `project-host` + `project` bundles (and tools if missing).
2. Builds `@cocalc/server`.
3. Starts hub daemon (if not running).
4. Runs self-host multipass smoke tests end-to-end, including:
   - cross-project file copy (project A -> project B),
   - backup indexing,
   - optional move/restore to a second host.

You can override behavior via variables in `src/.local/hub-daemon.env`.
For smoke-only toggles, set environment variables when invoking, e.g.:

```bash
SMOKE_VERIFY_COPY_BETWEEN_PROJECTS=0 pnpm --dir src smoke:self-host
```
