docs/self-host.md, before:

# Self-Hosted Project Hosts

This document describes how CoCalc Launchpad provisions **self-hosted** project
hosts and how the connector + SSH tunnels fit together. The goal is:

- minimal requirements on the remote machine,
- no public exposure of the hub,
- only SSH required for control/bootstrapping.

## Summary

Self-hosted hosts can run in two flavors:

- **Direct**: run the project-host directly on a Linux machine (no managed VM).
- **Multipass**: run the project-host inside a managed VM.

In both cases, the hub drives everything through a connector running on the
target machine. The connector talks to the hub through an SSH tunnel, and the
bootstrap script opens its own SSH tunnel so it can access the hub’s bootstrap
endpoints without the hub being publicly reachable.

## Sequence (Local/SSH-Tunnel Mode)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant Hub
  participant RemoteHost
  participant Connector
  participant ProjectHost

  Note over Hub,RemoteHost: Hub only listens on localhost
  Hub->>RemoteHost: ssh -R <rev_port>:127.0.0.1:<hub_sshd>
  Hub->>RemoteHost: ssh gcp "install-connector --ssh-host localhost --ssh-port <rev_port> --token ..."
  Connector->>Hub: ssh tunnel to 127.0.0.1:<rev_port> (polls /self-host/next)
  Hub->>Connector: create command (bootstrap payload)
  Connector->>RemoteHost: run bootstrap (direct or multipass)
  RemoteHost->>Hub: ssh -L 127.0.0.1:<hub_http>:127.0.0.1:<hub_http> via <rev_port>
  RemoteHost->>Hub: GET /project-host/bootstrap (over localhost tunnel)
  RemoteHost->>ProjectHost: install + start project-host service
```

## Key Pieces

### 1) Reverse SSH tunnel from hub to remote host

When a host has an SSH target, the hub starts:

```
ssh -R <rev_port>:127.0.0.1:<hub_sshd_port> <ssh-target>
```

This exposes the hub’s SSH server **on the remote host** at
`127.0.0.1:<rev_port>`. The reverse port is stored in
`project_hosts.metadata.self_host.ssh_reverse_port`.

### 2) Connector install over SSH

The hub installs the connector on the remote host:

```
ssh <ssh-target> bash -lc "curl ... | bash -s -- --ssh-host localhost --ssh-port <rev_port> --token ..."
```

This makes the connector poll via `http://127.0.0.1:<local_port>`, where that
port is locally forwarded to the hub through the reverse tunnel.

### 3) Bootstrap uses the reverse tunnel

The bootstrap script uses:

```
BOOTSTRAP_SSH_HOST=127.0.0.1
BOOTSTRAP_SSH_PORT=<rev_port>
```

so it can forward `127.0.0.1:<hub_http_port>` to itself and access:

```
http://127.0.0.1:<hub_http_port>/project-host/bootstrap
```

This works even if the remote host cannot reach the hub directly.

### 4) Direct vs Multipass

- **Direct**: connector runs the bootstrap script with `sudo` on the machine.
- **Multipass**: connector launches a VM with cloud-init, then bootstrap runs
  inside the VM.

## Notes / Assumptions

- The hub SSH server is required for local/SSH-tunnel self-hosting.
- The hub HTTP server is local-only and reached via SSH tunnels.
- The reverse tunnel port is dynamic; always use the stored
  `metadata.self_host.ssh_reverse_port`.
- The connector install uses `--replace` and should be non-interactive. If
  passwordless `sudo` is not available on the remote host, the install will
  fail (with a timeout).

## Related Files

- SSH tunnel + install logic: [src/packages/server/self-host/ssh-target.ts](./src/packages/server/self-host/ssh-target.ts)
- Bootstrap script generation: [src/packages/server/cloud/bootstrap-host.ts](./src/packages/server/cloud/bootstrap-host.ts)
- Connector implementation: [src/packages/cloud/self-host/go/main.go](./src/packages/cloud/self-host/go/main.go)

Commit message:

move port forwarding to the connector script

docs/self-host.md, after:

# Self-Hosted Project Hosts

This document describes how CoCalc Launchpad provisions **self-hosted** project
hosts and how the connector + SSH tunnels fit together. The goal is:

- minimal requirements on the remote machine,
- no public exposure of the hub,
- only SSH required for control/bootstrapping.

## Summary

Self-hosted hosts can run in two flavors:

- **Direct**: run the project-host directly on a Linux machine (no managed VM).
- **Multipass**: run the project-host inside a managed VM.

In both cases, the hub drives everything through a connector running on the
target machine. The connector talks to the hub through an SSH tunnel and
maintains a stable local port for hub access (by default the hub’s HTTP port),
so bootstrap can talk to the hub over `127.0.0.1` without exposing the hub
publicly.

## Sequence (Local/SSH-Tunnel Mode)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant Hub
  participant RemoteHost
  participant Connector
  participant ProjectHost

  Note over Hub,RemoteHost: Hub only listens on localhost
  Hub->>RemoteHost: ssh -R <rev_port>:127.0.0.1:<hub_sshd>
  Hub->>RemoteHost: ssh gcp "install-connector --ssh-host localhost --ssh-port <rev_port> --token ..."
  Connector->>Hub: ssh tunnel to 127.0.0.1:<rev_port> (polls /self-host/next)
  Hub->>Connector: create command (bootstrap payload)
  Connector->>RemoteHost: run bootstrap (direct or multipass)
  RemoteHost->>Hub: GET /project-host/bootstrap over 127.0.0.1:<hub_http>
  RemoteHost->>ProjectHost: install + start project-host service
```

## Key Pieces

### 1) Reverse SSH tunnel from hub to remote host

When a host has an SSH target, the hub starts:

```
ssh -R <rev_port>:127.0.0.1:<hub_sshd_port> <ssh-target>
```

This exposes the hub’s SSH server **on the remote host** at
`127.0.0.1:<rev_port>`. The reverse port is stored in
`project_hosts.metadata.self_host.ssh_reverse_port`.

### 2) Connector install over SSH

The hub installs the connector on the remote host:

```
ssh <ssh-target> bash -lc "curl ... | bash -s -- --ssh-host localhost --ssh-port <rev_port> --token ..."
```

This makes the connector poll via `http://127.0.0.1:<local_port>`, where that
port is locally forwarded to the hub through the reverse tunnel.

### 3) Bootstrap uses the connector tunnel

The connector maintains a local forward from `127.0.0.1:<hub_http_port>` to the
hub via SSH, so bootstrap can simply access:

```
http://127.0.0.1:<hub_http_port>/project-host/bootstrap
```

This works even if the remote host cannot reach the hub directly.

### 4) Direct vs Multipass

- **Direct**: connector runs the bootstrap script with `sudo` on the machine.
- **Multipass**: connector launches a VM with cloud-init, then bootstrap runs
  inside the VM.

## Notes / Assumptions

- The hub SSH server is required for local/SSH-tunnel self-hosting.
- The hub HTTP server is local-only and reached via SSH tunnels.
- The reverse tunnel port is dynamic; always use the stored
  `metadata.self_host.ssh_reverse_port`.
- The connector uses a stable local port for the hub (defaults to the hub HTTP
  port). Use a non-privileged port (>=1024) to avoid permission errors.
- The connector install uses `--replace` and should be non-interactive. If
  passwordless `sudo` is not available on the remote host, the install will
  fail (with a timeout).

## Related Files

- SSH tunnel + install logic: [src/packages/server/self-host/ssh-target.ts](./src/packages/server/self-host/ssh-target.ts)
- Bootstrap script generation: [src/packages/server/cloud/bootstrap-host.ts](./src/packages/server/cloud/bootstrap-host.ts)
- Connector implementation: [src/packages/cloud/self-host/go/main.go](./src/packages/cloud/self-host/go/main.go)
